I worked in the Information and Communications Technology sector for 23 years, where I acted in Technical Sales, Project Management and Competence Development in several countries. People, cultures and languages have become my passion throughout my life so I joined Faculdade Cultura Inglesa in the second term of 2019 as part of a professional career transition to English Language Teaching.
I had the privilege to have many good teachers in my life. A few ones, to whom I am especially grateful, demonstrated such a magnanimous, subtle attitude when guiding me in decisive moments. Their influence has prompted me to study the meaning, the essence of good teaching practice.
Having that resolve in mind, I volunteered for Faculdade Cultura Inglesa's Tutorial Project and was offered the opportunity to teach the C1 Advanced Preparation Tutorial, whose objective was to offer students practice on Reading skills and Use of English, components of the Cambridge C1 Advanced exam - Paper 1, under the supervision and guidance of one of the faculty members.
I gained initial experience through the tutorial of the second term of 2019, which was administered to a group of six students in a face-to-face setting. The analysis of this specific tutorial period is outside the scope of this study.
Considering the research question "What defines a satisfactory learning experience for C1 Advanced learners of English in the context of the C1 Advanced Preparation Tutorial over a remote learning setting?", this article aims to share the main findings learned from the adaptation of the C1 Advanced Preparation Tutorial to a remote learning setting over two terms in 2020 and two terms in 2021, each of them with distinct groups of students.
This study employed reflective tools to observe and analyse the phenomena in the virtual classroom that consisted of questions to the students and capture of reactions for reflection-in-action; and of a diary to register accounts and thoughts for reflection-on-action (SCHÖN, 1983). Needs for adjustment surfaced at the first sessions leading to changes required to increase the relevance of the learning experience to the students. This quick reaction upon reflection was key to enabling a safe learning environment for keeping students' level of satisfaction high.
The observations performed throughout the three subsequent tutorial periods demonstrated that the iteration of reflective procedures allowed for the evolution of the tutorial format to the point where it could be safely systematised.
After reviewing the main results, this article will conclude by demonstrating the effectiveness of the reflective practice procedures (SCHÖN, 1983; VAN MANEN, 2016) in adapting classes to remote learning settings while establishing a safe learning environment, raising the teachers' awareness of the students' learning objectives and motivations while still maintaining a high-quality learning experience.
The insights that emerged from this lived experience might be helpful especially for novice teachers engaged in similar endeavours.
The following section will provide the theoretical bases that supported this study.
